[blog] The Date Pickers gets a stable v5 release (#34152)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5.md

---

> title: 'The Date pickers gets a stable v5 release'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'The Date Pickers gets a stable v5 release'
```
@samuelsycamore, I'm a bit confused about the case on this one, since "Date Pickers" is not really a component but more like a reference to package(?).

Author: @joserodolfofreitas That's the last element to modify or not. Otherswise it's good for publiction

> title: 'The Date pickers gets a stable v5 release'

Reviewer 2: Let's capitalize it since it's a proper noun (consider "MUI X Date Pickers" vs "a date picker component"), and fix the verb conjugation ("They get"). I would also suggest adding MUI X to the title for branding purposes.

```suggestion
title: 'The MUI X Date Pickers get a stable v5 release'
```

Reviewer 2: We also need to fix the grammar on the card.

Reviewer 3: The naming of the product line is "Date and time pickers" by the way (talking about the work, not the capitalization)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3309670/190431442-4e514a42-8e34-42ef-ab1e-c617fcf441d7.png)

It can be reconsidered but unless we do it I would try to be coherent here

Reviewer 2: Good point, we should use the full name.

```suggestion
title: 'The MUI X Date and Time Pickers get a stable v5 release
```

> title: 'The MUI X Date and Time Pickers get a stable v5 release

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: The MUI X Date and Time Pickers get a stable v5 release
```

> description: Date pickers are now stable. Here is the summary of what changed.

Reviewer 2: How about we give a quick summary in the form of the action we want the reader to take?

```suggestion
description: The beta phase is over. Migrate to the latest version for improved DX, customizability, and API consistency.
```

Reviewer 2: Or just:

```suggestion
description: Migrate to the latest version for improved DX, customizability, and API consistency.
```

Reviewer: Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.

date: 2022-09-05T00:00:00.000Z

> authors: ['josefreitas', 'alexfauquette']

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authors: ['alexfauquette', 'josefreitas']
```

tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
card: true
---

> About four months ago, we moved the date and time pickers from `@mui/lab` and released the first alpha version of the date pickers package. We have focused on improving stability and developer experience since then, and now, we’re happy to announce the first official `@mui/x-date-pickers` [v5 release](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v5.17.0).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
About four months ago, we moved the date and time pickers from `@mui/lab` and released the first alpha version of the date pickers package.
We have focused on improving stability and developer experience since then, and now, we’re happy to announce the first official `@mui/x-date-pickers` [v5 release](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v5.17.0).
```

## TL;DR

- The beta phase is over. You can now download `v5.0.0`.
- Dozens of bugs have been fixed since the first alpha.
- DX and overall API consistency have been improved.
- Improved customizability.
- Follow the [installation instructions](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/getting-started/) and the [migration guide](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/migration-lab/).

> ## What changed?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What's changed?
```

### Documentation

We revamped the [getting started](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/getting-started/) page to ease the burden with installation, and improved sections that are key to customization, like the documentation of component [slots](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/custom-components/).

### Bug fixes and other issues

More than 150 issues were solved during the pre-releases (alpha/beta), including the epic [refactoring of the date/time selection behavior](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/4408), which has clarified edge cases about how a date is selected, accepted, dismissed, and which callbacks are triggered when.

A big thanks to all the contributors who took the time to clarify the edge cases they faced. It has been a huge help in refining the components behavior.

> <img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/monkeyuser-237-fov.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px;" alt="Bug illustration from monkeyuser.com" />

Reviewer 4: Based after #34222

```suggestion
<img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/monkeyuser-237-fov.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px; aspect-ratio: 112/59;" loading="lazy" alt="Bug illustration from monkeyuser.com" />
```

### Integrated localization

It’s not obvious at first glance, but the pickers do contain some textual information, including action buttons as well as aria-labels for accessibility support.

We integrated a [new localization](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/localization/#translation-keys) pipeline similar to the one used by the Data Grid. 
It lets you import translations directly into the main theme in a few lines. 
And thanks to the amazing contributors, translations for 11 languages are already available. 

```jsx
import { createTheme, ThemeProvider } from '@mui/material/styles';
import { DataGrid, bgBG as dataGridBgBG } from '@mui/x-data-grid';
import { bgBG as coreBgBG } from '@mui/material/locale';
import bgLocale from 'date-fns/locale/bg';
import { CalendarPicker, LocalizationProvider, bgBG } from '@mui/x-date-pickers';
import { AdapterDayjs } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/AdapterDayjs';

const theme = createTheme(
  {
    palette: {
      primary: { main: '#1976d2' },
    },
  },
  bgBG, // x-date-pickers translations
  dataGridBgBG, // x-data-grid translations
  coreBgBG, // core translations
);
```

> ## Evolution of the community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Community growth
```

Author: ```suggestion
## Community migration
```

With all those changes, we wondered if the community has been interested by the new versions.

From npm download statistics, less than 40% of the community is still using a version shared with `@mui/lab` (versions alpha.0 and alpha.1).
So a big part of you already did the migration from `@mui/lab`.

> And the adoption speed accros versions is very encouraging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the adoption speed across versions is very encouraging.
```

> Over 40% of users are already using the beta version. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over 40% of users are already using the beta versions. 
```

> <img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/date-picker-versions.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 2px;" alt="Evolution of downloaded version of @mui/x-data-pickers" />

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/date-picker-versions.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; aspect-ratio: 168/89;" loading="lazy" alt="Evolution of downloaded version of @mui/x-data-pickers" />
```

<p class="blog-description" style="text-align: center;">Relative distribution of `@mui/x-date-pickers` versions between June and August.</p>

## Installation and migration from `@mui/lab`

You can find the installation instructions in our [getting started](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/getting-started/) page.
If you are migrating from the `@mui/lab` package, we’ve prepared a migration guide to support you, including a codemod to replace the date pickers declarations.

## What to expect next?

> After working on stability and developer experience, we’re now pushing to improve the components usability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After working on stability and developer experience, we’re now pushing to improve the usability of the components.
```

## TL;DR

- The beta phase is over. You can now download `v5.0.0`.
- Dozens of bugs have been fixed since the first alpha.
- DX and overall API consistency have been improved.
- Improved customizability.
- Follow the [installation instructions](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/getting-started/) and the [migration guide](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/migration-lab/).

## What's changed?

### Documentation

We revamped the [getting started](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/getting-started/) page to ease the burden with installation, and improved sections that are key to customization, like the documentation of component [slots](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/custom-components/).

### Bug fixes and other issues

More than 150 issues were solved during the pre-releases (alpha/beta), including the epic [refactoring of the date/time selection behavior](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/4408), which has clarified edge cases about how a date is selected, accepted, dismissed, and which callbacks are triggered when.

> A big thanks to all the contributors who took the time to clarify the edge cases they faced. It has been a huge help in refining the components behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A big thanks to all the contributors who took the time to clarify the edge cases they faced. It's been a huge help in refining the components behavior.
```

### Bug fixes and other issues

More than 150 issues were solved during the pre-releases (alpha/beta), including the epic [refactoring of the date/time selection behavior](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/4408), which has clarified edge cases about how a date is selected, accepted, dismissed, and which callbacks are triggered.

A big thanks to all the contributors who took the time to clarify the edge cases they faced. It has been a huge help to refine the components’ behaviors.

<img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/monkeyuser-237-fov.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px;" alt="Bug illustration from monkeyuser.com" />

### Better APIs and improved customization

The property names and customization strategies were standardized to flatten the learning curve.

For example, the `MonthPicker`’s prop `onMonthChange` and the `YearPicker`’s prop `onYearChange` have both been renamed to `onChange`.

We also added new customizable slots:

> - The `ActionBar` allows you to customize the actions below the picker. It replaces the props `clearable`, `showTodayButton`, `cancelText`, `okText`

Author: Indeed 🙈 
https://www.notion.so/mui-org/Style-guide-2a957a4168a54d47b14bae026d06a24b#0ca592bd94a54b4ead62edacbac22088

```jsx
import { createTheme, ThemeProvider } from '@mui/material/styles';
import { DataGrid, bgBG as dataGridBgBG } from '@mui/x-data-grid';
import { bgBG as coreBgBG } from '@mui/material/locale';
import bgLocale from 'date-fns/locale/bg';
import { CalendarPicker, LocalizationProvider, bgBG } from '@mui/x-date-pickers';
import { AdapterDayjs } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/AdapterDayjs';

const theme = createTheme(
  {
    palette: {
      primary: { main: '#1976d2' },
    },
  },
  bgBG, // x-date-pickers translations
  dataGridBgBG, // x-data-grid translations
  coreBgBG, // core translations
);
```

## Evolution of the community

With all those changes, we wondered if the community has been interested by the new versions.

From npm download statistics, less than 40% of the community is still using a version shared with `@mui/lab` (versions alpha.0 and alpha.1).
So a big part of you already did the migration from `@mui/lab`.

And the adoption speed accros versions is very encouraging.

> You are already 40% to use a beta version. 🚀

Reviewer 2: Iterating on the suggestion above:

```suggestion
Over 40% of users are already using the beta version. 🚀
```

> <img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/date-picker-versions.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 2px;" alt="Evolution of downloaded version of @mui/x-data-pickers" />

Author: Had a look, but I do not manage to modify my locale to redo the plot, so I propose to let it as it is

<p class="blog-description" style="text-align: center;">Relative distribution of `@mui/x-date-pickers` versions  between jun and august.</p>

## Installation and migration from `@mui/lab`

You can find the installation instructions in our [getting started](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/getting-started/) page.
If you are migrating from the `@mui/lab` package, we’ve prepared a migration guide to support you, including a codemod to replace the date pickers declarations.

## What to expect next?

> After working on stability and developer experience, we’re now pushing to improve the components’ usability.

Author: I do not know

### Bug fixes and other issues

More than 150 issues were solved during the pre-releases (alpha/beta), including the epic [refactoring of the date/time selection behavior](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/4408), which has clarified edge cases about how a date is selected, accepted, dismissed, and which callbacks are triggered.

A big thanks to all the contributors who took the time to clarify the edge cases they faced. It has been a huge help to refine the components’ behaviors.

<img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/monkeyuser-237-fov.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 8px;" alt="Bug illustration from monkeyuser.com" />

### Better APIs and improved customization

The property names and customization strategies were standardized to flatten the learning curve.

For example, the `MonthPicker`’s prop `onMonthChange` and the `YearPicker`’s prop `onYearChange` have both been renamed to `onChange`.

We also added new customizable slots:

- `ActionBar` lets you customize the actions below the picker. It replaces the props `clearable`, `showTodayButton`, `cancelText`, `okText`

> - `PaperContent` lets you add custom elements in the desktop view

Author: ```suggestion
- `PaperContent` lets you add custom elements in the desktop view
- `Tabs` lets you customize the tab used to switch between date and time view
```

We also added new customizable slots:

> - The `ActionBar` enables customizing the actions below the picker. It replaces the props `clearable`, `showTodayButton`, `cancelText`, `okText`

Reviewer 2: I think "lets you" is a preferable substitute for "allows you to" in this context.

```suggestion
- `ActionBar` lets you customize the actions below the picker. It replaces the props `clearable`, `showTodayButton`, `cancelText`, `okText`
```

> - The `PaperContent` enables adding custom elements in the Desktop view

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `PaperContent` lets you add custom elements in the desktop view
```

### Integrated localization

> It’s not obvious at first glance, but pickers contain some textual information. The action buttons as well as the aria-labels for accessibility (a11y) support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It’s not obvious at first glance, but the pickers do contain some textual information, including action buttons as well as aria-labels for accessibility support.
```

> We integrated a [new localization](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/localization/#translation-keys) pipeline similar to the one used by the data grid. It enables importing translations directly into the main theme in a few lines. And thanks to the amazing contributors, translations for 11 languages are already available. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We integrated a [new localization](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/localization/#translation-keys) pipeline similar to the one used by the Data Grid. 
It lets you import translations directly into the main theme in a few lines. 
And thanks to the amazing contributors, translations for 11 languages are already available. 
```

We also added new customizable slots:

- `ActionBar` lets you customize the actions below the picker. It replaces the props `clearable`, `showTodayButton`, `cancelText`, `okText`

> - `PaperContent` lets you add custom elements in the desktop view

Reviewer 3: We can add `Tabs` here is its released before the stable

You are already 40% to use a beta version. 🚀

<img src="/static/blog/date-pickers-stable-v5/date-picker-versions.png" style="width: 796px; margin-top: 16px; margin-bottom: 2px;" alt="Evolution of downloaded version of @mui/x-data-pickers" />

> <p class="blog-description" style="text-align: center;">Relative distribution of `@mui/x-date-pickers` versions  between june and august.</p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<p class="blog-description" style="text-align: center;">Relative distribution of `@mui/x-date-pickers` versions between June and August.</p>
```
